# test

Liao 1
The Affinities between Martin Heidegger’s and Karl Marx’s Views on Modern Technology in Relation to the Living Experience of Human Beings
The significance of Martin Heidegger for ontology is as great as that of Karl Marx for political economy. However, these two thinkers are often set apart because of the disciplinary differences in their arguments and approaches. Heidegger is interested in what fundamentally determines an entity as that entity— that is, certain characteristics that are particular to it and hold true under all circumstances. Whereas Marx is more concerned with the influence of capitalism on people and society. While it is therefore reasonable to claim that their works should be arranged into different categories, it is equally tempting to look for possible intersections between their writings on a similar topic, because an inquiry like this can lead to a more comprehensive understanding of the subject. I use the term “affinities” to name the overlaps between Heidegger and Marx in order to preserve their overall and essential differences. In this essay, I intend to present that both Heidegger’s ontology and Marx’s political economic analysis suggest an unfree relationship between human beings and modern technology, and I propose that revealing the affinities between them is the key for us to understand this relationship. By elucidating the main concepts in Heidegger’s “The Question Concerning Technology” and Marx’s Capital and The Economic and Philosophic Manuscript of 1844, I suggest that there are two major affinities between their views on modern technology in relation to the living experience of human beings, despite clear differences in their overall arguments. The first affinity is that both Heidegger and Marx see modern technology as a means of producing effects by abstracting and manipulating the useful parts of things and determining the utility of things by their capability to contribute to human ends. The second affinity lies in their views on the way human beings are prevented by modern technology from encountering
Liao 2
themselves in the unfolding of their existence. After bringing out these affinities between Heidegger and Marx, I will further bridge and contextualize them by using them to interpret Wolfgang Schivelbusch’s study The Railway Journey, where he presents his observations on the close interrelationship between the developments of capitalism and railway systems. In the end, I will argue that this process of bridging and contextualizing the affinities leads to the conclusion that capitalism by its nature allows only regularity, uniformity, and productivity to be the dominating features of rail transport, and rail transport in turn limits its human subjects into ones with matching qualities.
There exist fundamental disciplinary distinctions between Martin Heidegger’s and Karl Marx’s approaches to modern technology and the living experience of human beings. In his essay “The Question Concerning Technology”, Heidegger, as an ontologist, attempts to understand the essence of technology, specifically modern technology, in relation to the ontological constitution of human beings – that is, the qualities and experiences that belong and are particular to humankind. On the other hand, Karl Marx plays the role of a political economist when he conducts investigations on the nature of modern technology and the life of the working class in capitalist society in his works Capital and The Economic and Philosophic Manuscript of 1844. The differences in their disciplines determine that Heidegger’s conclusions are supposed to be immune to changes in political and economic realities, while Marx’s arguments hold true only if the considered factual conditions are still valid and relevant. With this acknowledgement as a precondition, the following elucidation of their works intends to suggest that a close examination of their reasonings can reveal that there lie affinities in their views towards modern technology and its relationship to human beings, despite their disciplinary differences.
Liao 3
Through answering a sequence of interrelated questions, Heidegger’s essay “The Question Concerning Technology” argues that human beings hold an unfree relationship to modern technology, and that what is at stake in the advancement of technology is not something technological but rather human forgetfulness of their Being, their access to the world as infinite potentialities within their finitude. He departs from two common definitions of technology: technology as a human activity, and technology as a means to an end. Heidegger suggests these two definitions belong together and observes that causality plays a significant role in the latter, for a cause-effect relationship underlies the process of attaining an end. He then compares the traditional model of four causes with his own version of them. Through this juxtaposition, he reasons that the indebtedness, or responsibility, between each cause must be emphasised in our understanding of the way an effect is brought into appearance. Traditionally, the causes are the material, the formal, the final, and the efficient causes, and the efficient cause plays a determining role in the process of producing an effect. In the example of a silver chalice, these causes are, respectively, the silver, the shape of the chalice, the performances of a consecration or sacrificial rite, and the silversmith who forges the chalice; here, the silversmith “sets the standard for all causality” (Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology” 37). On the other hand, Heidegger’s own interpretation recognizes all four causes as equally important participants and stresses the indebtedness between each other. More specifically, as each cause sets boundaries for the chalice, the chalice is therefore indebted to all four causes for their circumscription. In this sense, during the process of bringing the chalice into appearance, the silversmith is not an efficient cause who plays a particularly special determining role. Instead, she is a participant who is responsible for the tasks of pondering and producing.
Liao 4
Revealing is the term that Heidegger uses to describe this causal process of bringing what is not yet present into existence, and technology is essentially a way of revealing. He finds the root of this activity in the Greek word poiesis, which portrays the revealing not only in the undertakings of artists and craftsmen, but also in physis, namely, the natural way of growing out. The former unveil products whose appearance must owe thanks to their producers, while the latter is arisen from and revealed out of the things themselves. In Heidegger’s view, physis is the highest form of bringing-forth, and an example is a blossom bursting into bloom. The intrinsic nature of technology as instrumentality determines that technology in every sense belongs to poiesis, to the process of unconcealing effects. The Greek root of the word “technology", techne, further suggests this connection between technology and the activity of bringing-forth, for techne explicitly stands for not only artists’ and craftsmen’s mastery of their skills but also their pondering and producing.
In Heidegger’s observation, artistry and craftsmanship, or poiesis, do not hold true for modern technology, in which everything is strictly reigned and understood by modern science through the lens of calculability and functionality; the revealing of modern technology is rather characterized by a challenging-forth into standing-reserve. This form of bringing-forth forcefully transforms nature into a source of extractable and storable energy that is constantly operating under heavy human demands. In earlier times, for example, a peasant would carefully cultivate and guard their land to grow food for their own subsistence. With modern technology, the same tract of land is now challenged into a place for pulling out coal and ore. Thus, the land is revealed as a mining district for coal and ore, which is in turn made subject to the electricity and nuclear industries. Similarly, a watermill, on the one hand, leaves itself to the flow of the river to complete the tasks of rolling and hammering, and it does not unlock energy from the
Liao 5
water currents in order to store it. The construction of a hydroelectric plant in the Rhine River, on the other hand, challenges the river into a source of hydroelectric power that supplies electricity to European countries. The Rhine is now revealed as an energy source and appears subservient to human commands. Moreover, in this kind of unconcealment, modern machines and the energy which has been unlocked and stored are brought forth into a state of standing-reserve, that is, a state of waiting to be ordered and used. For instance, the coal that has been extracted and stored always stays on-call, waiting for the command to deliver warmth to factories and residences. Therefore, the revealing of modern technology has led to an interlocking process of unlocking, storing, securing, and distributing, in which everything involved is evaluated based on its utility, its ability to be manipulated by human beings to achieve their ends.
So far, Heidegger’s analysis has demonstrated that the essence of technology is by no means anything technological but lies in a specific mode of revealing as a challenging-forth into standing-reserve. But then what is the role and state of human beings in the unconcealment of modern technology? Heidegger adopts the term enframing, or “Gestell” in German, to describe a state in which human beings, as the users and inventors of modern technology, set themselves up to be challenged-forth into the mode of standing-reserve. In his reasoning, for human beings to challenge nature in such a way that it becomes orderable by them, they inevitably “belong even more originally than nature within the standing-reserve”, because they necessarily not only consider themselves and others as usable resources but also recognize the revealing of modern technology as their only destiny (Heidegger, “Question Concerning Technology” 41). For example, the forester whose responsibility was to look after the trees is now commanded by the lumber industry to fell trees. She is thus made subordinate to the orderability of cellulose, which
Liao 6
is in turn challenged forth by the demand for paper. Paper production, for its part, is subject to the markets of newspapers and magazines, which allow a set of facts and opinions to be swallowed by the public. The forester, therefore, by no means has control over this unconcealment; rather, in every waking hour, she finds herself already in conformity to the revealing, in the answering of the call from the lumber industry. Enframing is thus neither artistry or craftsmanship, nor physis; the forester is not an artist or a craftsman, nor a blossom. The forester’s technological attitude towards trees posits their utility of being a material for paper production as the right⁠—if not the only⁠—potentiality of trees, and the forester thus rejects, ignores, or fails to take other potentialities into account.
With the German word “Gestell” specifically, Heidegger intends to bring out the regulation and abstraction within the setting-up of human beings as standing-reserve in the revealing of modern technology. Gestell at its most literal means “bookracks”. The strict, predetermined way of ordering and structuring in the nature of bookracks can be seen in the interlocking and systematic process of the unconcealment of modern technology, in which every participant is stabilized, cemented, and regulated. This specific way of setting-up is the prerequisite for realizing the orderability of the participants as standing-reserve and a suppressive restriction over what and how they are to be seen and perceived by themselves and others. Gestell also refers to skeletons. Besides the numbness of skeletons, the form of them suggests a particular abstraction of corporal beings. Similarly, modern science, which is the logical foundation of modern technology, surveys everyone through the lens of functionality and instrumentality and extracts only the useful and necessary parts from them. Gestell therefore expresses a specific mode of setting up human beings into the continuous, interlocking process of the revealing of modern technology, in which they are rigidly regulated as orderable standing-
Liao 7
reserve resources and are made to only look at the practical significance, the utility of everything in the world, including themselves.
For Heidegger, the modern technological mode of revealing is thus a destining, that is, a particular way for human beings to bring themselves forth in the world. It is, moreover, a specific kind of attitude that posits itself as the right and necessary one and therefore excludes or devalues other possibilities of what could be unconcealed. The danger of it lies not merely in the pervasive belief that modern technology has become the only destiny for human beings, but also in the fact that enframing as the unconcealment of human existence is a destining in which human beings no longer encounter themselves and their essence. In Heidegger’s philosophy, the existence of human beings is manifested and characterized by its infinite potentialities within the boundaries that are determined by certain natural limitations1. In this sense, the danger of enframing is human forgetfulness of their Being, of their access to the world as infinite possibilities within their finitude.
Different from Heidegger’s approach to technology and its impacts on human beings, Karl Marx’s analysis of this relationship is entirely grounded in political and economic facts, particularly facts about capitalist society. In his Capital: Volume I and The Economic and Philosophic Manuscript of 1844, Marx supports his reasoning with substantial historical and contemporary evidence and takes an aggressive position to prove that the central goal of capitalism is to accumulate capital by valorizing existing capital with purchased labour power. Modern technology and the lives of people are two areas which have been made subordinate to this overarching goal. Marx lays out a series of detailed explanations of the interplay between the
1 In his essay “Building Dwelling Thinking”, Heidegger argues that human beings are a part of the unity of earth, sky, divinities, and mortals, and human beings have infinite potentialities within the limitation of this unity.
Liao 8
capitalist quest for surplus-value and its direct impacts on the development of modern technology and the working and living conditions of people. The following discussion only intends to elucidate Marx’s concept of primitive accumulation in relation to his observations on technological inventions and the fourfold experience of alienation among the working class with the aim to find affinities between his reasoning and Heidegger’s theory of enframing.
In his Capital, Marx adopts the term “primitive accumulation” to name his account of the origins of capital accumulation and the formation of class distinctions, two fundamental components of the rise of the capitalist mode of production. For Marx, the historical process of primitive accumulation is one in which violence, in the form of coercion, oppression, destruction, and slaughter, was adopted and employed repeatedly by the powerful. Reviewing the timeline of the early modern period, Marx argues that a group of ruling class people in militarily advanced states such as Spain, Portugal, France, and England had accumulated a significant amount of wealth through participating in extensive conquests, colonization, enslavement, robberies, and murders. While this horrendous period of history played an important role in the classification of the rich and the poor, what fundamentally formed the class distinctions between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat was the historical process of alienating the producer from their own means of production. This divorce was executed forcefully through the expropriation of land from the peasantry through war and religious reform, resulting directly in the emergence of two distinct kinds of commodity owners. The first group are the owners of money, means of production, and means of subsistence, with the desire to increase their capital through valorizing existing assets and purchased labor power. The second group are the workers who now own no means of production and thus must rely on the propertied class, to whom they sell their labor power, for their subsistence. This compulsory dependency has historically not only forced the
Liao 9
proletariat into places where means of production are concentrated but also caused them to experience an ever-growing impoverishment proportional to the financial enrichment of the bourgeoisie. These two components—the accumulation of wealth in the hands of the ruling class and the formation of the class distinctions—allowed the onset and operation of the capitalist mode of production, and modern technology played a critical role in this development.
In Capital, Marx is also very specific about his view towards modern technology as he emphasizes the relationship between machines and the capitalist pursuit of surplus-value. He does not focus on the possibilities of developing and employing the machines in other modes of production. It is therefore reasonable for Marxist scholar Amy Wendling, in her interpretation of Capital, to comment that, “While a pre-critical theory of technology could assert that existing machines were used in ways inimical to the interests of the working class, a critical theory of technology argues for something stronger: that capitalism only develops machines that advance its social and political interests. All machines are capitalist machines: all technology is capitalist technology.” (Wendling 369) The development of modern transportation and automation in the workforce are two examples where Marx’s reasoning shows that specific modern technologies were invented to substantially facilitate two processes: the circulation of labor and commodities, and the improvement of labour productivity at the cost of the impoverishment of the proletariat. Means of communication and transport such as telegraphs, railways, and river steamers were designed and constructed because their predecessors “were so utterly inadequate to the needs of production in the periods of manufacture” (Marx, Capital 506). The assignment of these newly invented systems was to allow the possibility of moving an enormous amount of people and goods across the world faster than was unimaginable before. They not only consistently met these demands but also adapted themselves to the evolution of the capitalist mode of production.
Liao 10
By producing such useful effects and realizing changes in location efficiently, machines contributed significantly to the operation of capitalism even though they themselves did not produce any commodities.
The development of automation in the workforce, on the other hand, directly enabled the propertied class to accumulate capital through deskilling the worker and increasing surplus-value. With the introduction of machines such as steam engines and self-acting mules, the labour of the worker was for most part simplified into merely a kind of motive power that was responsible for ensuring and correcting the operation of the machines. Such inventions also tremendously enhanced the productivity of the worker, which in turn allowed the bourgeoisie to obtain more profits in the same amount of time. Marx uses the term “surplus-value” to indicate the excessive labour that capitalists can extract from the worker aside from the labour that was required for the worker to meet their absolute daily needs. Because of the increased productivity, the worker could now produce value that amounts to their basic needs within a shorter timeframe, meaning that the rest of their labour could generate more surplus-value for the owner of their labour, who as a result could achieve more profits. The impoverishment of the proletariat that was accompanied by the development of modern technology was therefore twofold. Firstly, they were intellectually crippled because most of their labour became simplified and repetitive. Secondly, they were financially poorer in proportion to the capitalists, for while the former’s earnings stayed more or less the same, the latter’s wealth increased rather notably.
So far, the elucidation of Marx’s reasoning has shown the interrelationship between primitive accumulation, the development of modern technologies, and the impoverishment of the proletariat, but we have yet to consider the proletariat’s working and living conditions. Observing the actual economic facts about the results of land expropriations and capitalist
Liao 11
competition for larger profits in The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, Marx adopts the term “alienation” to characterize the working and living conditions of the workers and argues that they are alienated in four specific ways: they are alienated from the product of their own labour, from the act of production, from their Gattungswesen, and from other workers.
Firstly, the worker is alienated from the product of their own labour, for, under capitalism, the deprivation of the means of production results in the dispossession of the ownership of the product. This mode of production fundamentally alters the direct relationship between the product and its producer in such a way that the product becomes an alien and independent power over the producer. Not only has the product been turned into a commodity, but the very labour which creates it has also become a commodity during the production, as the labour is purchased by the owners of the means of production to meet their demands. Consequently, the producer is now received as a servant of the product and the labour and must rely on this servitude for their means of physical subsistence. And the more they produce, the poorer and weaker they inevitably become in proportion to the production that they depend upon.
Secondly, the worker is alienated from the act of production, and this is manifested by the fact that, as Marx observes, they feel at home when they are not working, and when they are working they do not feel at home. During the act of producing, the worker finds themselves discontent and depressed as their labour becomes not only external but also hostile to them under the command and coercion of capitalists. Given the defining role of labour in human existence in Marx’s philosophy, this kind of activity equally means that for the time the worker remains as a worker, they belong to capitalists in the most radical way.
Thirdly, the worker is alienated from their “Gattungswesen,” which should be translated and approached as both “species-being” and “species-essence”. The former is characterized by
Liao 12
the universality and the free, conscious activity of human beings. As members of a species, a collective, who are always part of nature and are nature themselves, human beings are born with the potential to voluntarily bring out their multiplicity through various kinds of exchanges with nature and others. The estrangement of the worker from their species-being turns them into an atom that is occupied by the sole mission of being a servant of their labour. The latter, species-essence, differentiates human beings from other animals by enabling them to make their life activity the object of their will and consciousness. While animals are predominantly driven by their immediate physical needs, human beings can act and produce independently of physical needs. They can objectify their life freely, consciously, and intellectually, in accordance with the laws of nature and beauty; they can let the product of their labor be a servant of its own and, as a species or individuals, admire, confront, and contemplate on it. In the estrangement of the worker from their species-essence, their life activity becomes merely a means to their physical existence, one that is marked by passiveness and colourlessness.
Lastly, deducing from the previous aspects of the estrangement, Marx maintains that the worker is alienated from other workers. The realization of the relationship in which the worker stands to themselves is inseparable from their relationship with other workers and with human beings in general. In alienating them from their labour, in creating loss and torment for themselves, the workers are simultaneously bringing out gains and satisfaction for others; more specifically, the estrangement of the workers from themselves realizes others’ domination and coercion of them, and the hostility in this relationship is one that can never be reconciled.
The elucidation of Heidegger’s philosophy on the essence of technology and Marx’s concepts of primitive accumulation, technology, and alienation has thus far revealed the fundamental differences between their approaches and attitudes towards technology in relation to
Liao 13
human beings. While Heidegger is composing an ontological analysis and is concerned with the nature of technology in relation to the way human beings approach the world, Marx as a political economist is disturbed by the way the historical development of capitalism has turned modern technology into its accomplice and caused the working class to live and work in a state of alienation. Heidegger finds the essence of technology in its unconcealment of effects and argues that the revealing of modern technology is characterized by an interlocking process of unlocking, storing, securing, and distributing, where everything involved is set up into a state of standing-by and conformity to human orders. On the other hand, Marx’s examples of modern transport technologies and automation in the workforce show that modern technology was invented and deployed to facilitate the two processes of constantly concentrating and circulating propertyless workers and accumulating wealth by generating surplus-value with the purchased labour-power— that is, the two processes crucial to the onset and operation of the capitalist mode of production. Furthermore, Heidegger states that the danger of modern technology lies in the fact that human beings now see modern technology and the rationale behind it, namely, modern science, as their only way of approaching the world. This thinking suggests human forgetfulness of their Being; in other words, humans are forgetting their access to the world as infinite potentialities within their finitude. Marx maintains that the capitalist mode of production and capitalist technologies directly caused the fourfold experience of alienation among the proletariat: they were alienated from the product of their labour, the act of production, their Gattungswesen, and other workers. The most significant difference between Heidegger’s and Marx’s philosophy in general, after all, is that the former holds the view that human beings for most of their lives are living in a mode of inauthenticity2 like enframing, whereas the latter
2 In his Being and Time, Heidegger argues that, for most of our lives, we live inauthentically in the sense that we often fall into social norms and make certain decisions only because others have done so. Heidegger suggests that
Liao 14
believes that the impoverishment of the working class can be eradicated by overthrowing capitalism and redistributing the means of production to people in a communal manner. This fundamental difference is what often sets these two distinguished philosophers apart from each other.
Despite their differences, there nevertheless exist affinities between Heidegger and Marx. The first affinity lies in their views on modern technology. Both Heidegger and Marx consider modern technology as a means of producing effects by abstracting and manipulating the useful parts of things, determining their utility by their capability to contribute to human ends. Heidegger argues that modern technology as a specific kind of human attitude posits itself as the only correct one in its evaluation of everything and everyone. It abstracts and manipulates things in a way that they become useful based on its standard. This process equally means that it necessarily rejects, ignores, or fails to take their other potentialities into account. The evaluation, therefore, is at the same time a devaluation. In this modern technological mode of revealing, all the things in the world are challenged forth into certain kinds of resources that lie waiting to be used by human beings to accomplish their goals. Marx specifically points to capitalism and claims that modern technology has been developed to serve the purposes of capitalists, to make everything into resources for them to generate wealth. From this perspective, Heidegger’s concept overlaps with what is maintained by Marx, and Marx’s examples and reasoning in a sense contextualize Heidegger’s theory. It is also worth mentioning that neither of them consider
we would consider our connection to things around us differently if we thought of them in relation to our inevitable death. It is also worth mentioning that, with this concept, Heidegger only intends to bring out an important part of our ontological structure, so there are no moral implications behind this concept and the use of the term “inauthenticity”.
Liao 15
modern technology as corrupt or dangerous in itself, for the effects that it brings out are, after all, determined by human beings.
The second affinity lies in their views on the way human beings are prevented by modern technology from encountering themselves in the unfolding of their existence. Heidegger is particularly concerned with the way human beings bring out effects with modern technology. For him, modern manufacturing like that seen on assembly lines is an impoverished process in which human beings have no control over the unconcealment, whereas production in the form of artistry and craftsmanship requires careful consideration of the interrelationship between the four causes and specific sets of skills in bringing the causes into effects. Poetry, in which effects are revealed while the causes are left untouched, is another laudable form of production in Heidegger’s opinion. In Marx’s view, labour is a means for human beings to externalize themselves in the world. His theory of alienation nevertheless suggests that in the capitalist mode of production, the proletariat can no longer express themselves and achieve self-development because their labour is now owned, controlled, and spent by capitalists. For the majority, they are made subordinate to manufacturing technologies and merely assist the machines to produce. The product that they produce does not belong to them but rather has become something alien and hostile. Therefore, the working-class people can no longer see themselves in their production.
Two affinities between Heidegger and Marx have been roughly laid out. Now, I propose to contextualize them by using them to interpret Wolfgang Schivelbusch’s study The Railroad Journey, which will not only further bridge the affinities but also bring out what is suggestive in Schivelbusch’s analysis. By focusing on Schivelbusch’s observations on the historical development of modern railway transportation, particularly on its effects on the notion of space and time and the railway drivers and passengers, I argue that his analysis can be read to suggest
Liao 16
that capitalism by its nature allows only regularity, uniformity, and productivity to be the dominating features of its infrastructure, and these facilities and systems in turn limit their human subjects into ones with matching qualities. This specific kind of setting up everyone and everything is a principal and necessary way for capitalism to maintain and optimize its production. This process, for both Heidegger and Marx, results in the deprivation of the multiplicity in the existence of human beings.
Schivelbusch’s observations on the development of railroad systems in the nineteenth century suggest that the progress made in railway technology and its direct consequences were deeply entangled with the capitalist desire for greater regularity, uniformity, and productivity in its infrastructure. This is an example of the affinity between Heidegger and Marx in their view on modern technology: it was advanced to abstract and manipulate only the useful parts of things for the purpose of meeting specific human ends. In the pre-industrial era, horsepower was the main energy source for railway traffic, and the speed and travel distance of locomotives must subject themselves to the irregularities and biological limitations of horses. The newly invented steam engines were already capable of producing steam power that could generate more regular, uniform, and constant motions. It was nevertheless, as Schivelbusch suggests, the innovative moves of mounting a steam engine on an undercarriage and conjoining rails and vehicles as one machine ensemble that fundamentally emancipated railway transportation from the natural boundaries of animal power. This integration was designed to allow not only steam trains but also intense and precise interactions between each part of the ensemble while restricting the possibility of jolts and overthrows to a minimum. The realization of high velocity and regularity in steam railways in turn achieved the effect of the “annihilation of space and time” (Schivelbusch 33).
Liao 17
A set of data will demonstrate the unprecedented efficiency and popularity of railway systems in the nineteenth century. The travelling time between the most important cities in England “was reduced by four-fifths between 1750 and 1830, and cut in half between 1770 and 1830” (Schivelbusch 7). The trip from London to Edinburgh, for example, required ten days in the 1750s, but it took only about forty-five hours in 1836. The significant improvement in travelling speed was accompanied by increases in traffic intensity and in the number of travelled routes. For instance, the number of regular departures in the ten most important English cities surged tenfold in 1830 compared to that figure in 1790, and the number of passengers multiplied fifteen times. This tremendous reduction in average travel time and immense increase in traffic intensity caused a drastic alternation in the spatio-temporal reality of the travellers. The world was both enlarged and shrunk for them, as they could now arrive in a distant place within only a fraction of the previous travel time.
Also annihilated by the advancement of steam railways, Schivelbusch maintains, were the original, unique locality and temporality that once were attached to different regions and their products. The old transport technology such as horse-drawn wagons had created a specific kind of space-time continuum by forcing the travellers to experience sensuous realities in their journey. This continuum was essential for forming and maintaining the local identities of different regions because a landscape used to be “determined only by its relation to the neighboring place within the circle of visibility” (Schivelbusch 53). Steam trains, which knew only their points of departure and destination, were the opposite: they masked the traversed spaces and alienated locations from locations, altering the landscapes into closed spaces which could only be defined in relation to the map of railway networks, and hence erasing the unique local identities of these regions. The destinations, for the travellers who no longer experienced
Liao 18
the concrete realities of the travelled spaces in their journey, thus “seemed to be a product of the railroad” (41). Similarly, for Schivelbusch, the product lost its local identity when it was transported to a foreign market, as the consumers were unlikely to sensuously experience the place of its production, let alone the actual labour process. To take just one example, cherries imported for the shelves of the Paris market thus “were seen as a product of that market” (41).
Additionally, the expansion of railway systems dismissed the individual temporal identities of different regions by popularizing the Greenwich Time as an official and standardized time. Before the railway became the dominant means of land transportation, most of the cities in Europe had their own local times. London time, for example, ran four minutes ahead of time in Reading and fourteen minutes ahead of Bridgewater time. The arrival and departure time of each regional train station therefore complied only with its local time, and for many years, every railway company had to compose a new time for each of its own lines in a daily and cumbersome manner. By the second half of the nineteenth century, the establishment of a national railway organization in England first led to the introduction of Greenwich Time as the standard time for all rail lines in the name of convenience. Due to the growing intensification of rail traffic in the country, this official railroad time became the general standard time in England. Subsequently, other central European countries also began to adopt Greenwich Time as their own time zone for the regularity and uniformity of rail networks, but at the cost of the unique temporal identities of numerous regions.
Marx and Heidegger would consider the loss of unique local and temporal identities as an inevitable consequence of the advancement of modern rail transport, because what holds true for modern technology is its role as a means to produce effects by abstracting and manipulating only the useful parts of things. In this case, the development of capitalism determines what would be
Liao 19
considered as useful. In his Grundrisse, Marx observes the influences of capital on spatiality and temporality and remarks, “Capital by its nature drives beyond every spatial barrier. Thus the creation of the physical conditions of exchange—of the means of communication and transport—the annihilation of space by time—becomes an extraordinary necessity for it” (449). The capability of railway transport to circulate labour and goods in a fast and extensive way was precisely one of these necessary conditions for capitalist exchange, for it allowed labour and goods to be both concentrated in and distributed to markets. This circulation, as Marx explains, was a decisive step in “the transformation of the product into a commodity” (Grundrisse, 459). From this perspective, the original local identities of different regions and their products were abandoned or eliminated in their process of becoming part of the circulation and commodities in the market. Similarly, the unique temporalities of these regions must yield themselves to the standardized time as the national railway organization pursued greater efficiency and regularity in the railway networks. Heidegger would possibly maintain the view that modern rail transport revealed space and time in a way such that they became useful for the development of capitalism. The capitalist pursuits for regularity, uniformity, and productivity in the railway system had consequently determined that a “spatial-temporal singularity” was useful and necessary for its progression (Schivelbusch 41). To produce effects that would meet this end, the revealing of rail technology excluded other possibilities of treating space and time by ignoring and devaluing the individualized spatial and temporal identities of different regions. In other words, it abstracted a specific facet of spatiality and temporality and manipulated them in a way that they conformed themselves to the needs of capitalism.
The analysis has so far demonstrated that modern railway transport was developed to be more regular, uniform, and productive in order to facilitate the advancement of capitalism.
Liao 20
During this process, the multiplicity of the traditional local and temporal identities in different regions was reduced into one single dominating notion of space and time, which was considered useful and even necessary in improving the regularity, uniformity, and productivity of railway systems. By focusing on Schivelbusch’s observations on the railway telegraph system and railway accidents in the following paragraphs, I argue that the capitalist pursuits for regularity, uniformity, and productivity in railway transport had in turn shaped the human participants in it into ones with matching qualities. For Marx and Heidegger, this process was precisely an example of their affinitive view that after modern technology plays a significant role in their life, human beings can no longer control or encounter themselves in the unfolding of their existence.
After isolated rail lines owned by private enterprises became institutionalized under juridical and politico-economic regulations, the organization found the regulation of the operation of rail trains equally necessary for further improving the overall uniformity and efficiency of the system. The application of the telegraph system to railways was an important step to regulate the movement of trains. This communication system functioned by dividing an entire rail line into separate blocks and assigning a telegraph transmitter to each section, whose only responsibility was to inform the telegraph center about the status of their area. This system, therefore, relieved the engine driver from any obligation that required their personal perception and judgement, because they now only needed to manoeuvre the train on a predetermined route by following the signals provided by a distant telegraph center. Consequently, an engine driver, Schivelbusch compellingly argues, “could never aspire to the social role of a ‘captain on dry land’: the electric telegraph confirmed his true status, that of an industrial worker, an operator of a machine” (30).
Liao 21
As railway systems expanded into every major district in Western Europe and became the most popular means of transportation on land, the travellers had assimilated the speed and culture of rail trains as their reality. Nevertheless, the engine driver or the passengers would fool themselves if they truly believed that their train was completely under their control – not only because, as John Ruskin puts it, they were merely “human parcels” who were sent by the train from one place to another and had no autonomy over the traversed spaces; but also because any sudden dysfunction or interruption of the functioning of the train “immediately reawakened the memory of the forgotten danger and potential violence: the repressed material returned with a vengeance” (Schivelbusch 54, 130). To illustrate this uncontrollability and destructiveness, Schivelbusch remarks that the breaking of a coach axle in the eighteenth century would merely lead to a slowdown or an interruption in a trip on the highway, while the breaking of the axle in the Versailles rail accident in 1842 caused approximately fifty-three deaths and forty injuries (Adams 60). In the Versailles accident, the doors of the crowded carriages were kept locked the entire time, even though the driver and passengers knew that the train had derailed, and the carriages were about to crash together into each other. This disaster was afterwards perceived by the public as “a negative indicator of technological progress”, which had put humans in a position “best compared to that of a man who is walking along the edge of a precipice and cannot afford a single false step” (Schivelbusch 132).
In Marx’s and Heidegger’s view, this train journey, disastrous for both the engine driver and passengers, was part of the unfolding of their existence which they had no control over and in which they could not encounter themselves. Marx would maintain that the experience of the driver was characterized by a state of alienation. The driver was alienated from her labour and the production, for she sold her labour to the railway company and was demanded to work in a
Liao 22
designated way. As a driver whose assignment was to ensure the operation of the machine, she was thus assisting the machine to produce effects that allowed people and goods to change location; in other words, the driver was not producing anything for herself. By running in a predetermined route and giving commands, the engine and the telegraph system fully regulated the way the driver performed the labour. Consequently, the driver was not expressing or externalizing herself through working but was instead made subordinate to the labour and the machine ensemble. Similarly, Heidegger would argue that the way the rail transport produced the effects abstracted a certain ability of the driver and conformed her to its own standard of evaluation. More specifically, the machine ensemble demanded the driver to follow the prearranged road, comply with the instructions given by the telegraph center, and operate the train in a way that it could best maintain regularity, uniformity, and productivity. Unlike the artist and craftsman in Heidegger’s mind, who possess mastery of their skills and bring out effects through pondering over the materials at hand and holding the finished product in view, the driver herself had no direct access to the information about the route or the entire rail network, nor any control over the change of location caused by the train. The driver was rather made subject to the machine ensemble, merely assisting it to achieve its effects. Marx and Heidegger would also suggest that the journey had become an alienating process for the passengers: they had no control over themselves because they could no longer decide for themselves how they wanted to experience the traversed spaces. The fast speed and the irreversibility of the train turned the places that it passed by into “a panorama” at best, an unreachable and unrecognizable streak at worst (Schivelbusch 61). Therefore, the train transformed the passengers into mere parcels and the travelling into an irrelevant and insignificant process. The inevitability of fatal rail accidents further proved, to both the
Liao 23
passengers and the driver, the uncontrollable nature of railway transport. The capability of causing an accident was and still is a potential of the overall functionality of the machine ensemble, and its level of violence escalated as it became more regular, uniform, and productive. A century after the Versailles accident, the dysfunction of a train in Balvano caused the death of 520 people. The situation for the driver and passengers was, again, completely uncontrollable.
This preliminary inquiry into the potential affinities between Heidegger and Marx has revealed for us two clear intersections that lie beneath their main arguments about the influence of modern technology on human beings. The subsequent interpretation of Schivelbusch’s observations on railway systems from the perspective of these two affinities not only further bridges and contextualizes them but also brings out what has been implicitly suggested in Schivelbusch’s study. To continue this inquiry and test the strength of these affinities, I propose the following possible options. First, we can attempt to explore the potential affinities between Heidegger’s and Marx’s views on the term “alienation”. Although Heidegger seldom uses this word, a number of concepts in his magnum opus Being and Time, such as “inauthenticity”, “the ‘they’”, “Angst”, and “Being-towards-the-end”, can be interpreted in a way that they are in relation to the root meaning of the word “alienation”, namely, the separation of two things that originally belonged to each other. Marx, as already shown above, has presented a concrete set of theories on alienation as a fourfold experience of the working class people who depend on the capitalist mode of production for subsistence. The second option is to bring Heidegger and Marx into conversation with Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno. In their The Dialectic of Enlightenment, Horkheimer and Adorno argue that modern science and its root, instrumental reasoning, make everyone and everything fungible, resulting in a kind of sameness in every aspect of society. The incorporation of this argument into our conversation will lead to a more
Liao 24
comprehensive understanding of modern technology. Lastly, and most importantly, we must work with secondary literature on the connections between Heidegger and Marx, such as Herbert Marcuse’s Heideggerian Marxism and the works on Left-Heideggerianism by Henri Lefebvre and Lucien Goldmann. This process will substantially enrich our current position and argument.
Liao 25
Bibliography
Adams, Charles Francis. Notes on Railroad Accidents. Putnam, 1879.
Federici, Silvia. Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation. Penguin Books, 2021.
Heidegger, Martin, and Martin Heidegger. “Building Dwelling Thinking.” Basic Writings: From Being and Time (1927) to the Task of Thinking (1964), edited by David Farrell Krell, HarperCollins, San Francisco, California, 1993, pp. 343–364.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Harper Perennial, 2008.
Heidegger, Martin. The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude. Indiana University Press, 2012.
Kaplan, David M., and Martin Heidegger. “Question Concerning Technology.” Readings in the Philosophy of Technology, Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, MD, 2004, pp. 35–52.
Marx, Karl, and Ben Fowkes. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy. Penguin Books, 1976.
Marx, Karl. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844. Wilder Publications, 2018.
Marx, Karl. Grundrisse. Translated by Martin Nicolaus, Penguin Books, 1981.
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. The Railway Journey: the Industrialization of Time and Space in the Nineteenth Century. University of California Press, 2014.
Wendling, Amy E. “Technology and Science.” The Marx Revival: Key Concepts and New Interpretations, edited by Marcello Musto, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2020, pp. 363–375.
